https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q26XECZh-EE


select * from gov_requests where request_id in (15635,15636);

My query is not running well/ approach of perf tuning / how to debug when there r many queries running 

ans : 

How much time my business can wait ?

If it can wait 5 mins ? like ticket reservation 

atm ? 15 secs 

since when u have this problem ? 

A. gradual drop of query performance 

Due to data 

Need to do partitioning 

B. suddenly query performance drops ? 




explain plan ? 

is there full table scan ? 

can i use hint? might change the execution part 

maybe index is corrputed : so check the last analyzed date present in the tables : (user_tables & user_indexes)

if it is maybe atleast 2 week old? then ask to compute the stats 

analyze table table_name compute statistics;
analyze index index_name compute statistics;

Oracle stores the stats of the analyzed object in data dictionary 

Check that every fk must be indexed 

As per database documentation, every fk must be indexed, else it might sometime give u deadlock issue 
which is hard to reproduce in local env.

suppose there is an account table and dept table both having fk associated with each other 

if one user from another session tries to I/U/D in the account table and at the same time.
this will lock the dept table, other user who is accessing dept has to wait till this process completes causing deadlock.

 

(ð„ð¯ðžð«ð² ð…ð¨ð«ðžð¢ð ð§ ðŠðžð² ðŒð®ð¬ð­ ððž ðˆð§ððžð±ðžð - ðˆð¦ð©ð¨ð«ð­ðšð§ð­ ð‚ð¨ð§ðœðžð©ð­ ð¨ðŸ ððžð«ðŸð¨ð«ð¦ðšð§ðœðž ð“ð®ð§ð¢ð§ð 

For better performance of query, it is always advisable that every FK must be indexed. 
As per oracle, We've been having some Oracle deadlock issues that have been hard to reproduce locally. while we've been pretty good creating integrity constraints in the database we have not been very good about making sure that every foreign key has a corresponding index. And that can lead to problems.

ðˆðŸ ð°ðž ðð¨ ð§ð¨ð­ ðœð«ðžðšð­ðž ðˆð§ððžð± ð¨ð§ ð…ðŠ, ð¢ð­ ð¦ðžðšð§ð¬ ð°ðž ð¢ð§ð­ð«ð¨ðð®ðœðž ðšð§ ð®ð§ð¢ð§ð­ðžð§ð­ð¢ð¨ð§ðšð¥ ððžðŸðžðœð­. Indexing foreign keys is a best practice in database management because it enhances query performance, ensures data integrity, and reduces locking issues. Implementing indexes thoughtfully can significantly improve the efficiency and responsiveness of your database system.


ð…ð¨ð« ðžð±ðšð¦ð©ð¥ðž: So we had a situation where our documents table had a foreign key on the accounts table that was not indexed. So updating an account row lead to a whole table lock on documents (instead of just a row lock which would have happened if there was an index) and that was very bad when we had two separate processes where one was doing a bunch of accounts stuff and the other was doing a lot of documents stuff. Deadlocks for everyone!)


Nowadays DBs are using cost based optimizer, so when a complex query is there

DB follows steps : parser --> optimizer --> executor 


DB has to choose for the minimum I/O(n/w or path) which depends on 3 scenarios : 

which order, which method and which access path 

1. order 

now if there are suppose 5 tables in the query , there r 5!= 120 ways for DB to choose the order of the tables 

2. method 

suppose the order is A B C D E

the method between A to B  can be (nested loop, sort merge join, hash join )
same is the case wrt other tables as well

this 3^4(A-B,B-C,C-D,D-E) = 81 methods for DB to access from one table to other table

3. access path 

index full scan
table full scan
range scan
unique scan 
star transformation
bit map 
btree 

even if we consider avg 5 paths , so there will be 5^5= 3125

So total of 1,2 and 3 combinations : 120*81*3125 =3.037 million possibilities

DB will cannot afford enough time to check all these possibilites 

It will instead go for a pragmatic approach and pick 2k best guesses & choose one of them

So there is a possibility of choosing wrong path 

Noida to Delhi 

50 rs metro save time 
but queue and crowd too many people 

uber 500 rs , comfortable but costly 

bus 10rs but take long time 

The first time when the query runs, DB stores the plan # value in the library cache

So in soft parsing, it will pick the plan from there which it had initally picked after
checking only 2k of the possible 3M methods instead of wasting time to choose another path

So if wrong plan is chosen the same will keep repeating, hence we need to intervene and finetune
the query 

So we can try rewriting the query like using CTE(common table expression)

It is a divide and conquer approach where a long query is divided into multiple small queries

And its best to filter the data as early as possible 

Is there any distinct or union in use ? can i remove it ? 

Is there any left join ? can replace it with inner join to reduce the amount of data from left ? 

Is there order by ? can i remove order by ? 

Is there 'IN ' and Exist ? can i remove IN by Exist ? 

If the query is doing DML operation , we can go for Bulk Collect For All to fetch bulk data in 1 shot
reducing context switch from SQL to PLSQL block 

We can use NO logging with Append HINT (direct path insert) it will minimal of redo loggin and 
make perf better in DML operation 

IF the query is SELECT statement 

we focus on : 

1) how to avoid overhead of cpu 
(check index & stats are appropriate or not using bulk binding or not,
can i use with clause with materialize HINT or not 
avoid distinct and union, avoide select * and choose the columns i need 
can i remove like operator, wild card search , can i use instr instead ?
can i reduce in clause and use exist clause ? 
can i avoid functions like UPPER LOWER TRIM TRUNC)

2) how to avoid overhead of memory

help from DBA on how to tune my buffer cache 
how to tune my SGA/PGA 
how to tune my redo log buffer
-------------------------------------------

Identify the long running query

either u provide me 

else tell DBA to generate AWR (automatic workload repository)
check table v$session_long_ops table which stores queries that took over 6 seconds


If there is any blocking session then kill the session after confirmation from DBA 

else 

  is there any recent changes new index/sequence/table altered / new fk , some changes in the 
  tables involved 
  
  OR 
  
  any large volume data operations have been performed? 
  
  IF yes 
  
     ask DBA to compute stats 
 
     analyze table table_name compute statistics;
     analyze index index_name compute statistics;

  ELSE 
     
     check history of plan #value in AWR as the query was running perfectly fine till yesterday
     
     IF yes plan #value got changed 
     
         check for stale stats in DB_statistics table there is a column : is_stale_stats
         
         IF yes 
         
             compute stats 
             
         IF no 
              
              ask the DBA to pin the optimal plan by using SPM (sequel plan management )   
              
     IF no plan #value did NOT change 
              
              am i processing a lot more data ? if yes that's normal
              
              so what is the best time to run ? or did it run ? after business hours or during 
              business hours when lots of users are using the system
              
              any issue with storage layer ? check with DBA temporary memory allocation issue 
              
              
            
              
